# CST8917-Assignment1-JoshuaChen

**Student Name**: Joshua Chen

**Student ID**: 041280453

**Course**: CST8917 Serverless Applications

**Semester**: Spring 2026

---
## Part 1
The central thesis of this paper is that the current state of serverless computing is not at its full potential and that there are still many improvements to be made. It outlines this by saying that serverless functions have taken “one step forward, two steps back” [1]. The current version of cloud computing involves fully managed services offered by a cloud provider. This means the services can auto-scale and do not require any infrastructure management from the user, which is a step forward for serverless computing. Where it takes a step back is where the current version ignores the importance of efficient data processing and ignores the development of distributed systems. These are two concepts that can really improve the current version of cloud computing [1].

### Limitations
One of the limitations identified is the execution time constraint. Most serverless functions have a limited lifespan of anywhere from 5 minutes to 15 minutes, depending on the cloud provider. This can limit what can be executed on the service [1].  
The second limitation is communication and network limitations. Cloud providers often host functions owned by a single user in a single virtual machine and have a total average of 538Mbps network bandwidth. As more functions are grouped in the virtual machine, the less bandwidth each function receives. Additionally, serverless functions must constantly access storage services to read and write data. Finally, each serverless function does not have an individual address, meaning you cannot communicate with specific functions [1]. 
The third limitation is an anti-pattern known as data shipping. As serverless functions run on isolated virtual machines that are short-lived and not addressable. Meaning that each time the function starts, it must read a storage device to get the information. Which slows down the process (adds latency) [1]. 
The fourth limitation is hardware access, as there is no specialized hardware that optimizes serverless functions. Serverless functions just run on regular servers [1].
The final limitation outlined is the challenge for distributed computing and stateful workloads. Once again, serverless functions are not individually addressable, meaning that the fine grain communication needed for a distributed system is not there. Additionally, by their nature, the serverless functions are stateless, which goes against the stateful workloads as it does not hold onto any of their memory after its execution [1]. 

### Future directions
The paper does propose several improvements for future cloud programming.
One of these proposals is “Fluid Code and Data Placement” [1], which, as outlined in the paper, is about co-locating the data and code. This means that the code and data should exist on the same device but still be separated. The proposed solution is the design pattern of shipping code. Where code will be sent to the storage device and executed on the storage device [1]. 
The second proposal is “Long-running and addressable virtual agents” [1]. This proposal, as the name suggests, involves removing the timeout of functions and making them addressable. This removes the wasted time on having to read the data each time a function is executed. Since elasticity is a big part of cloud computing, these proposed functions should be able to “be virtually and dynamically remapped” [1] to physical resources as they scale [1]. 
A third proposal was “flexible programming common IR (Intermediate Representation” [1]. Due to the complexity and time, it would take to implement relevant optimizations on different programming languages for them to better work with serverless functions, they proposed a “flexible programming common IR (Intermediate Representation” [1]. Which is basically an intermediate library or compiler that will read different programming languages, translate and optimize the code, and then execute it [1].

## Part 2
Orchestration model
The orchestration model is the basis for how durable functions work. It consists of 3 main components the orchestrator, the activity and client functions. The orchestrator function is responsible for controlling the workflow logic determining when and what activity function to activate. The activity function is the basic working unit; it executes a single task and returns the results to the orchestrator. The client function is basically the trigger function. It tells the orchestrator when to start. Altogether, the client function will receive an event that triggers an orchestrator function. Which would then call different activity functions in order until the task is done [2]. This differs from basic FaaS as it is a simple method to chain functions together, as it handles all the backend logic needed for functions to trigger one another and pass information between them. It also keeps track of its history for easy recovery.

### State management 
Durable Functions manage states using event sourcing. This means that it uses an append only storage method where it appends the changes in the state of the orchestrator. The act of appending the events is known as checkpointing, and it saves the current state of the function. By saving the execution history, appending the function that is called, and then appending a message for the orchestrator itself. When the orchestrator restarts, it will replay this history, going step by step through it. Checking which activities have been called, whether they have a result, and skipping them if they do [3]. This addresses the stateless criticism of the paper, as the durable function is stateful [1]. Since it keeps track of its history and the results of the activity functions, meaning that if it fails, it does not have to restart from the beginning. As well as not having to reload data each time 

### Execution Timeout
Durable functions are still restricted by the timeout restrictions imposed by Azure. As orchestrator, client, and entity functions all still have timeouts. What changes from regular Azure Functions is the function handling of it. When a timeout occurs, the durable function treats it as a regular error and has error/exception handling that will catch it and will normally just restart the timeout function. Additionally, the orchestrator keeps a track of its history/state so it can recover quickly to the point it timed out at without having to redo any of the work. Since the activity functions are still limited by the regular Azure Function timeouts, it still limits what can be executed on them, as the orchestrator does not save the state of the activity function, but just the state of calling the function and its results. So, the activity functions are still limited by the timeout unless they are specified to be long-running. [4]

### Communication between functions 
The orchestrator and activity functions communicate through the Durable function libraries. The orchestrator will call the activity function like any other/regular function or method, passing in parameters. It can do this asynchronously or synchronously, and the activity function will return a result. Additionally, when the orchestrator calls the function, it will first check the history to see if the function has already been executed and just get the results if it has. The parameter values being passed in are also loaded locally or gotten through the history [3]. This addresses some of the criticism from the paper. As it handles the communication limitations and history issue [1]. As the orchestrator will often handle the data loading and pass the values as parameters, it reduces the number of calls to the storage services that the activity functions make. Additionally, since the orchestrator’s replay functions, it prevents already run activity functions from being re-executed. 

### Parallel Execution 
The fan-out/fan-in pattern works by the orchestrator function calls multiple functions in parallel and saves the instances of these functions into a list. The orchestrator then waits until all the instances within the list return values. Before continuing onto the next steps in the workflow [4]. This helps address the issue of coordinating parallel functions within the paper [1]. As the orchestrator can coordinate the starting multiple activity functions, handle errors that happen within functions, and collect the results. Additionally, it can remove the extra latency that is added by each function having to individually get the data, as the orchestrator can load it once and pass it as a parameter.  

## Part 3
While durable functions have addressed several criticisms outlined in the paper, there are still a couple of limitations left. The first being the co-location of the data and code. Durable functions still isolate the code and data into separate services [1]. I believe the main reason for this is due to the cost and time needed to implement a co-locate solution. The current durable functions use pre-existing infrastructure, so it would take time and money to research a new implementation for co-location data and code and to update the current infrastructure to use it. Since the current services that the cloud providers offer serve most of the clients, they have no incentive to spend this time or money on this topic. 

The second limitation that is not fixed by durable functions is the specialized hardware. As previously stated, durable functions use the current infrastructure, which is just regular servers [1]. The reason that no specialized hardware has been used is that it still must be invented, which once again takes time and money that the cloud providers will not want to spend, since their current infrastructure servers most of their clients already. 

I believe that the current durable functions do not represent the kind of progress that the authors envisioned for serverless computing. While it is true that durable functions resolve some of the limitations outlined in the paper, like the I/O bottleneck and limited lifetime [1]. There are still some limitations that are left, and these can be big ones. For example, I am unsure of how durable functions handle the bandwidth limitations as outlined in the paper, but I am assuming that it doesn’t [1]. As durables functions are something built on top of normal Azure Functions, that means there is no improvements in the hardware for it. Additionally, durable functions do not address any of the key future improvements that the paper outlines. For example, “Fluid Code and Data Placement” [1], as previously mentioned, the durable functions are built upon Azure Functions and the current infrastructure. This means that code and data are still stored on separate devices, and as such, the anti-pattern of shipping data to code is still being used [1]. While durables functions have taken steps to speed up the process of data transfer, it does not do so in the manner described in the paper. Another example is the “Heterogeneous Hardware Support” [1], which the paper outlines as allowing the appropriate resources to be assigned based on the requirements of the function [1]. Current durable functions only allow basic cloud resources (CPU and RAM) from a dedicated Azure Function server. However, the paper desires any hardware outside the dedicated resources assigned to Azure Functions to be use able by the developer like faster CPUs or even GPU, which is currently not available [1]. The final example is “Flexible Programming. Common IR” [1], the paper suggests that a built-in optimizer should be implemented into serverless functions that will translate any code and optimize it for the cloud [1]. Durable functions do not do this; it mainly handles the chaining of functions and optimizing the corresponding orchestration. It does not handle the optimization of the activity functions. Through the examples, the improvements that the paper outlined are not being implemented with durable functions. So, durable functions are not the kind of progress that the authors are envisioning for serverless computing. I believe that this is mainly due to these improvements requiring time and money to implement, as they are all new processes. Currently, cloud providers have a working service that fulfils most of their customers’ needs and will not want to hurt profits by investing in these improvements.  

## References
[1]	J. M. Hellerstein et al., “Serverless Computing: One Step Forward, Two Steps Back,” 2019, [Online]. Available: https://www.cidrdb.org/cidr2019/papers/p119-hellerstein-cidr19.pdf

[2]	“Programming model overview,” Microsoft Learn. Accessed: Jun. 14, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/durable-task/common/programming-model-overview

[3]	“Durable orchestrations,” Microsoft Learn. Accessed: Jun. 14, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/durable-task/common/durable-task-orchestrations

[4]	“Performance and Scale in Durable Functions - Azure,” Microsoft Learn. Accessed: Jun. 14, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://docs.azure.cn/en-us/azure-functions/durable-functions/durable-functions-perf-and-scale


## AI Usage
- Claude was used to summarize part 1 (of the paper), the introduction part of the paper
- Claude was used to explain the terms used in the paper (SLOs, DSLs) and explain what an IR is
- Claude was used to summarize and simplify part 4 (of the paper), the improvement part of the paper
- Claude was used to help research the topics in Part 2 of the assignment, providing a quick summary and additional resources to learn more
- Claude was used to double check my understanding on how Orchestrator Functions pass parameters into Activity Functions and  Fan Out Fan In pattern